All right, tape is going, sir.
The one thing I didn't get into last time, the two areas, would be your involvement in
script writing, TV's and movie, and also your poetry.
So let me just ask a couple of questions about the, say your television writing.
You've written for many television shows such as, I guess, Twilight Zone, Alfred Hitchcock
and so forth.
Do you still do that, or is that phase of your career over?
No.
I've had two things on this year, the electric grandmother, which was starring Maureen Stapleton,
and it's been on twice now, since January, a one-hour show about a robot grandmother
that raises children, and it turned out very well.
I was very proud of it.
And then another of my scripts was, Any Friend of Nicholas Nickelbees is a friend of mine,
starring Fred Gwynne playing the part of a false Charles Dickens, and this was basically
on a stage play of mine that I did in Los Angeles a few years ago.
Yeah, I realize you didn't know, I was sort of getting at those sort of a series kind
of show where you had to write something on cue.
Well, I tried never to do that anyway.
I had a very friendly relationship with Alfred Hitchcock and all of his partners,
Barry Jones Harrison and Norman Lloyd.
I'd go out and have a casual lunch, tell them an idea.
They'd okay it.
I'd go home and write it and come back with a finished script and we'd have another lunch.
If they could argue me into any changes, I'd make them, and if I could argue them into
the logic of my situation, it stayed the way it was.
So it was a very amiable, very friendly thing.
I never did a lot of scripts.
I wouldn't let myself get bullied into being a full-time writer because no one remembers
who writes scripts for television anyway.
Were any of those things you did for those shows based on your own stories or did you
write them?
Most of them were.
I did three one-hour shows for Hitchcock for his big one-hour series, and then I did
eight or nine scripts, maybe ten or twelve, for the half-hour series.
All but one of those were my own stories.
Okay, two of the, I guess the movies that go back to the, gosh, I guess the sixties,
I think were made from your short stories.
It came from outer space and the Beast from Twenty Thousand Fathoms.
Is that right?
That's correct.
The Beast from Twenty Thousand Fathoms, that was done from the story, was it called Foghorn?
No, it was a story called The Beast from Twenty Thousand Fathoms.
It appeared in the Saturday Gene Post, and that was the title they put on it.
Later I changed the title when I put it in one of my books and called it The Foghorn.
Okay, and was it the, that was the one you did with Ray Harryhausen, wasn't it?
That's correct.
You're such a lover of books and so forth.
If I wondered how you'd give so much energy to the visual arts.
Well, I grew up with all these loves.
If I have any capacity at all, it's to be in love in six or seven different ways.
So I've always been madly in love with motion pictures.
My mother was a, a fiend for them and took me to see hundreds of films from the age of,
when I was two until up until I was ten, eleven or twelve.
So that never left me.
And I think I'm very fortunate to have a great love of films, a great love of libraries and books,
a great love of radio and the famous people in radio.
When I came west to live in Los Angeles, I headed downtown immediately
and got to know all the people on an old radio broadcast called Hollywood Hotel.
And Lovalla Parsons became a friend to this 13, 14 year old boy.
And I knew Burns and Allen during those years of 1934, 35, 36.
I wrote scripts for them every week and handed them in.
Of course, I doubt if they even read them, but they pretended that they did.
And they were very kind to me.
And then I was in love with Orson Welles when he came on the scene in radio
and to Spence and Norman Corwin who became my friend when I was 27 years old.
So I grew up then with a love of libraries, a love of radio, a love of films.
And I think I'm very lucky that I've been able to work in all of these different mediums
and do rather well in each one of them.
How many of your plays have been performed?
Oh, I would say somewhere around 14 or 15 of them.
Most of them I've produced myself.
Dan Lime-Wine here on the coast recently, back east a few years ago.
The Martian Chronicles which I produced here at a small theater.
Fahrenheit 451, two years ago which turned out very well.
The wonderful ice cream suit and six or seven of my one act plays.
I've had the Anthem Sprinters which is all of my Irish experiences.
So I've had a lot of fun with it and I've made a lot of friends among actors.
I've worked with a lot of good people including James Whitmore who appeared in my first one act play here.
And he had a benefit for the United Nations about 23 years ago.
Okay, let me move on to your poetry because we just, since I talked to you last,
we've gotten this new book, The Complete Poems of Ray Bradbury.
What determines, when the muse comes on you, what determines whether you write a story, a poem, a play, an opera, whatever?
I haven't the faintest idea. It just knocks me over.
Sometimes in the middle of writing a poem I'll say, oh my, this is too big for a poem.
I may very well finish the poem but then I sit down and turn it into a short story immediately.
Or on a rare occasion it turns into a stage play or a novel.
That doesn't happen as often. Most of the time I work in the short form.
But quite often you take the simplest idea and it evolves from the poetry form into,
well, I was, for instance, I was driving around in England a few years ago.
And a chauffeur of our car was talking about driving in the Irish and funerals, Irish wakes and what have you.
And he told of this one wake of some friends of his in a small town in Ireland where an English lord lived nearby.
And that's the time when he died he went against the old saying, you can't take it with you.
And he took with him all of his wine and he had all the thousands of bottles of wine in his cellar poured into his grave.
Well, it was such a great idea that I wrote it as a short story last week and sent it off.
And it'll probably be in play, boy, sometime in the next few four, five months.
Yeah, good. You mentioned in the introduction to that book, I think I know what you mean by it, but you said that your poems write you.
Yes, they do. Just as my stories do.
You can control them. They write what they want to say.
Okay, I personally responded. There's a few of the poems in there. All of them I did, but I thought that some of them were exceptionally good.
The one that you yourself like, The Boys Across the Street or Driving My Young Daughter Mad, The Haunted Computer and the Android Pope,
The Attic or The Metal Greens and Abandon in Place. I thought those were excellent works.
Do you have any that you think are particularly, you're particularly fond of or that you think are particularly good?
No, I think you've named some of the good ones.
And at the time I write them, of course, I think each one is good or I wouldn't have put it in the book.
I try not to ever publish a poem or a short story that I've gotten tired of.
I assume that you'll continue to write poetry then.
Oh, yes, yes, yes.
Is there, okay, you've written novels, short stories, poems, plays, operas, scripts. Is there anything you haven't tried?
I can't think of anything offhand. Now that I'm working on this libretto for this opera, that sort of rounds out the list.
I'm working on a detective murder mystery novel now, which I've never done before.
So it's a new, it's a change for me in the novel form.
I've been a great lover and admirer of Dashiell Hammett and Raymond Chandler for the last 40 years or so.
And I always wanted to do something in that field, but I was afraid to do it because I wasn't well enough educated,
even though I'd read hundreds of novels in the field when I was younger.
It didn't seem to get into my bloodstream, but now I think I'm old enough and I hope I've learned my lessons.
And when the novel comes out, people will agree that it's at least an agreeable competitor in the field.
Do you have any date when that might come out?
No, I would say about a year from now. It's right up close to being finished.
I've been working on it for seven or eight years, but you never know.
I might finish it all in one week in the next week or two.
And again, it may drag on for another six months. I'm not in charge. I don't make the decisions.
Okay. You're obviously extremely hard to categorize or to pinpoint.
What do you think or how do you respond when you're categorized or called a science fiction writer? Does that bother you?
Well, it can. It depends on how it's used. Some people use it with prejudice.
There's still some librarians in the country. There's still some critics.
There's still some teachers who think that science fiction isn't worth bothering with.
And of course, that drives me wild.
So their opinion actually irritates me because to me it's the central fiction of our time.
We are science-oriented, technologically-oriented people, and there's nothing else to write about except human beings
in some sort of relationship with their ideas, with their machine reads, with their technologies.
All the major problems of our time right now are technological, scientific, moral problems.
What do you do with the automobile? What do you do with nuclear power? What do you do with cloning?
What do you do with DNA experimentation? All these problems that arise as soon as you invent something new.
So all of our major problems right now, you can't name one that's not connected to a machine somewhere down the line.
You see no opposition or antagonism between the arts and the sciences.
There shouldn't be. I mean, after all, especially in science fiction, we're cooperating to give scientists ideas
so that they can create new ways of living. Without the creative thought of the poet, the filmmaker, the novelist,
of 100 years ago, we wouldn't be on the moon. We're on the moon at this very moment because Jules Verne put us there first.
Okay, excellent. I guess you wouldn't agree with what Plato had to say in his Republic about the danger of imagining it to literature then.
Well, there's always been that talk among intellectuals who don't stop and think what they're saying.
It's a very dumb remark. I mean, if you don't have an imagination, you can't survive.
If you don't have some sort of creative instinct in you, how do you think people survive Buchenwald?
Well, those who survive survive you with their imagination. A lot of them were able to imagine at times, for a little while, they were somewhere else.
If you're in a jail and people are dying all around you, you damn well better have the power of imagination so that you can imagine a future where this will stop
or you can imagine a present where you're not there for a little while.
So live inside your head and to forget the horror that surrounds you. That's a huge thing to be able to do.
A lot of people did it. It's remarkable. It's miraculous. But that's what a human being is, a miraculous animal in the history of the world who's able to survive.
Okay, I just have a couple more here. In reading your work, I obviously have picked up your admiration for George Bernard Shaw,
but I've never heard a statement or read a statement from you as to why you admire him so much.
Well, my God, he is, of all the writers of our time, just about. At least on the, when you think of Irish English literature for the theatre,
he is the idea writer of all ideal writers. He and G.K. Chesterton and a few others, but he sort of outraces and outpaces everyone.
You name a subject and he just pretty well wrote about it 70 years ago, 100 years ago, 90 years ago.
He was interested in theology. He was interested in machinery. He was interested in the future. He was interested in biology.
He had a far-ranging curiosity about mankind and the future of mankind.
So he wrote science fiction as well as doing theological studies and great characters from history like St. John.
I'm so sorry that I never had a chance to get to Europe while he was still alive.
Okay, this is sort of a strange question, but if you don't like to answer it, you won't have to.
But what books would you pick to, or what books or authors would you pick the educated young person from?
Well, I would recommend George Bernard Shaw as soon as someone was old enough. I don't think you can give Shaw to children,
nor can you give him to kids in high school. But as soon as people get into college, then I would bring Shaw out and give him a complete education
and ideas on how to think. And at the lower level, I imagine I would start them off with Jules Verne and H.G. Wells, the science fiction writers.
Because kids really are interested in ideas, and it's very playful. It's wonderful to have an interest in such things.
And that's the reason why science fiction, during the last few years, has been so popular in the high schools, in the junior high schools.
The kids recognize that these fictions deal with very real problems that must be solved.
You have the fun of playing with those toys inside your head.
Okay, say 100 years, 200 years from now. Is there any particular thing in all your work that you'd like to be remembered for?
Oh, I hope that something wicked this way comes to go around. I think it's a universal book, at least I hope it is.
It deals with children and growing up and growing old and getting sick and dying. All the things that happened to all the people in the history of the world.
I hope the book won't age, that it would be long to no special time, but it will to all times.
It's my favorite, and I love it because I suppose I'm locked into it with my father. My father is the hero of the book.
I didn't know that at the time I wrote it. One night I got up and wandered around the house and picked up the book and started to reread it.
And suddenly it dried out and tears burst in my eyes and I realized that I'd written my father into the book as Mr. Holloway, who is the hero of the entire structure.
So that's one of the reasons why I love it. I hope people have a little life after I'm gone.
We're going to teach a fantasy class here next semester at the college and that's one of the books we're going to teach.
In fact, we should be teaching that class right after the movie comes out. That's due the 1st of the year, right?
I hope it will be. We're still working on the special effects, so it may be somewhere on March.
That'll be just about right. We'll just take the whole class down.
Good enough.
Okay, let me ask one more. You've already mentioned the novel you were working on and so forth, but do you have any plans or are you working on any more novels or stories besides the ones you mentioned?
Oh yeah, I've got seven or eight other new short stories I've been working on recently.
So I have another book with short stories out in about a year and more poems and more plays and a huge book on creativity and my own ideas.
I've written sort of autobiographical charting of where I get my ideas and how I wrote all of my novels.
I wanted to sort of work similar to but certainly not equal to summing up by some of that small.
And I think ideas are fascinating. Where do you get a story idea and what do you do with it?
After all, I've written four or five hundred stories.
So that would make, I think, an interesting story.